Introduction

For this project, I analyzed a variety of statistics taken from the top 60 NBA players of the 2015-16 season, ranked by PER (player efficiency rating).  The data set contains several quantitative variables and two categorical variables, lottery selection and player position.  I first performed a 1-variable analysis on average points scored for the sample.  I then turned to a two-variable analysis that compared minutes per game and points scored. In the third section I created a confidence interval for the difference of proportion of draft lottery selections (players selected with the first 14 picks of the NBA draft) with above average EWAs (earned win average, explained in that section) for the sample. Finally, I conducted two hypothesis tests, one of which compared the difference of mean EWA among players from the lottery and the other which tests the independence of draft position and player position.  

	
Analysis

1)	For the 1-variable descriptive analysis, I chose to look at average points scored for each player.  I found the mean and standard deviation from a sample of 60 players with the highest PER in the NBA over the 2015-16 season.  The average sits almost squarely between the min and max, which is the first suggestion we might have a normal distribution.  The standard deviation is about 5.7, which is moderately large given the overall spread of the distribution.  The histogram shows a roughly symmetric distribution which supports this assumption.  There are no outliers or other strong deviations from this pattern.  Turning to the 5-number summary, we first see that the mean and median are within 1 point of each other, which again supports the assumption of a symmetric distribution.  We also see when looking at the 5-number summary that there is a substantially larger variance at the bottom (min to Q1) and top (Q3 to max) of the distribution that at the middle (Q1 to median, median to Q3).  This tells is that there is a larger number of players with average points centered around the median and fewer at the tails.  Looking at the floor and ceiling, we can see that no player averages lie outside of the floor and ceiling, which confirms based on the 5-number analysis that there are no suspected outliers.

2)	For the two-variable descriptive analysis, I looked at each player’s average minutes per game (MPG), which is an explanatory, quantitative variable and average points per game (Points), which is a response, quantitative variable.  If we first apply these variables to a scatterplot, we can get a good illustration of the overall pattern and strength of the causal relationship, along with identifying any potential outliers. The first thing we see is is that the variables are positively associated and are clustered between about 15 and 23 points per game with a corresponding average of between 30 and 37 minutes played.  We can also see that there are a relatively small number of players playing less than 30 minutes and their point average drops steeply as their minutes decrease.  The form of the relationship is generally linear which tells us there is a strong relationship between the two variables. It is easy to see why players given more minutes tend to score more points, and in fact a common refrain in the NBA is that, given the opportunity to play more, a player will produce more!
Looking at correlation, we see a value of about .84 which suggests a strong positive correlation.  When we look at R^2, we see that about 70% of the variation on points scored can be explained away by minutes per game.  The residual plot shows that the variance in points scored is pretty consistent across the sample, since there is a straight line pattern and the residuals are randomly distributed above and below the regression line over its length.


3)	In this section, we compare the proportion of lottery players and other players to determine the Confidence Interval for determining their EWA. EWA is a statistic that gives the estimated number of wins a player adds to a team’s season total above what a 'replacement player' would produce.  It is a primary indicator of the overall value a player adds to his team’s success. The data is summarized in a table which gives the number of lottery players with above average EWA (> x-bar), below average EWA (< x-bar), and the same for non-lottery players.  This is then turned into a table that gives the proportions for these same populations.  We then find p-hat (sample proportions) and standard error for each population.  From the p-hat values, we determine the difference and the standard error for the difference.  Assuming a confidence level of 95%, alpha is .05 and z* is computed to be approx. 1.96.  Finding the margin of error based on z* and the standard error of the difference, we are able to construct a confidence interval based on the difference plus/minus the margin of error.  Thus we can conclude with 95% confidence that the real difference between EWA average for the population is between approx. -.14 and .37.


4)	In this section, I conduct a hypothesis test that compares the difference of means among two populations, players that were selected in the lottery and players that were selected later in the draft or not at all.  I compared EWA (EWA) of the two groups. The null hypothesis is the the EWA of the both groups is the same, while the alternative hypothesis is that the lottery players (considered in this context the “successes”) will have a greater EWA. To compare the two populations, we compute the average, standard deviation and standard error of the EWA for the two populations, and then we find the difference between the means of the two populations, which is our estimate.  We then find our test statistic(t) value by using the estimated difference, the null hypothesis (the assumed difference in EWA, in this case, zero) and the standard error of the difference.  We generate a test stat that is the two-tailed p-value based on a normal distribution, incorporating the test stat and the degrees of freedom (determined in this case to be the minimum sample size minus one). To find a result, we compare the p-value to our alpha value (.05 for a 95% confidence level) and see the the p value is much less than alpha, and so we must reject the null hypothesis that we can expect the average EWA for lottery players and other players to be the same.


5)	This section examines the the independence of two categorical variables, the player position being the explanatory variable and the draft position being the response variable.  That is, we are asking whether there is an association between a player’s position and when they were selected in the draft.  The table was condensed to a 2X2 table because some of the values were too small.  The row table tells us that about half of lottery selections from the sample are forwards, and the rest are other.  It also says that about 76% of players selected outside of the lottery were not forwards.  The column table tells us 80% of forwards were selected in the lottery, and just over half of other players were selected in the lottery.
The expected table tells us the values that we would expect in the overall population given the sample, while the difference table compare the actual with the expected.  Finally, these values are standardized in order to produce our test stat and p-value.
We establish our null hypothesis that there is no association between the two variables, and our alternative that there is an association.  Since the p-value is less than alpha, our result is that we reject the null hypothesis and conclude that the two variables are associated.  We can now say that a player’s position (forward, other) is related to their draft position (lottery, other) and specifically we can see from our analysis of the rows and columns that being a forward is positively associated with being selected in the lottery.


Conclusion

In summarizing the results, we must first acknowledge the nature of our sample. This analysis was drawn from the top 60 players by Earned Win Average, and so it is not a random sample of NBA players.  Therefor, it would be incorrect to compare this group to the overall population of NBA players.  This made it more challenging to use the data, and in hindsight I would have selected fewer variables and a larger sample, ideally ALL NBA players.
Nonetheless the analysis I was able to do within the sample yielded some interesting results.  We could see that there is actually substantial variance in points scored between the players, which is interesting, because as I highlighted in the previous paragraph, these are top ranked players by EWA, and we might assume they would all have high scoring averages.  However, as we see in the analysis of the association between minutes per game and points scored, while most players with high EWAs play about 30 to 35 minutes per game, there are several players who are efficient while on the court, but who do not get sufficient playing time to score a lot of points. An extreme case of this is Boban Marjanovich, a hulking 7’3” center wo is remarkably efficient while on the court, but is also limited in the scenarios he is able to play, and so his points scored and minutes played are very low.  In most cases, we could reasonably predict that, given more minutes, a player would produce more points and other valuable stats, but in some situations, a player is limited by the matchups with other teams, their conditioning, or their health, and so we can’t always make this inference.
	Another interesting relationship identified in this project was the association between player position and draft position.  I found that forwards from the sample were much more likely to be selected in the lottery as opposed to other players.  This could probably be explained by the fact that forwards are by nature mid-sized players that have the size and versatility to thrive.  Centers are less common in general, since there are very few 7-foot people alive that can play high level sports.  Guards, on the other hand, tend to be smaller, and while they have a vital role on teams, they are often more limited in the the types of impact they can have, given their size.  In the modern NBA, forwards can often replace centers and guards, and often times do.
	Finally, from the first hypothesis test we can see that being selected in the lottery has a definite association with a higher EWA.  This is a valuable finding in that draft position is a highly coveted commodity in the NBA.  Teams scramble to trade for top picks in the draft, and some times intentionally lose games to get a higher draft spot!  Oftentimes, players drafted highly can end up not living up to expectations, while lower draft picks or even undrafted players can thrive.  Overall, however, our analysis shows that players drafted in the lottery do in fact outperform other players. 
